Vim is a text editor, but it is also a language for interacting with text!
There are two popular ways to interact with text, "vim-like", "emacs-like".

"emacs-like" uses modifier keys to differentiate between text being inserted, and commands being issued.
    For example: control-a to go to the beginning of a line, controle-e to go to the end of a line, alt-f to go forward a word, alt-b to go back a word.
"emacs-like" is popular for line editing.
    For example: bash uses emacs-like commands by default.

"vim-like" uses modes to differentiate between text being inserted, and commands being issued.
    For example: in "normal" mode, 0 to go to the beginning of a line, $ to go to the end, w to go forward a word, b to go back a word.
"vim-like" is popular for navigating text.
    For example: the "less" pager uses vim-like commands by default.

There are 4 vim modes to be aware of: normal, insert, command, visual.

    normal mode: keystrokes are interpreted as motions, verbs, and modifiers.
        "delete two characters" 2dl
        "forward five characters" 5l

    insert mode: keystrokes are inserted as text.
        Typing "hello" inserts "hello".

    command mode: used to issue commands to vim. Edit a file (e), list buffers (ls), etc.

    visual mode: an extra layer on normal mode, helpful for visualizing yanking (copying) and deleting text.

    To go from normal mode to insert mode, press "i", "I", "a", "A", "o", or "O".
    To go from insert mode to normal mode, press "Esc".
    To go from normal mode to command mode, press ":".
    To go from normal mode to visual mode, press "v".

How to learn!
    Start writing something! Everytime you get stuck use google, help pages, or a cheatsheet.
        "I want to go to the beginning of the document, looks like its 'gg', I will use that from now on."
        Say the motions as you use them to help remember!
    Use a game or interactive tutor: vimtutor, https://vim-adventures.com/.

Beginner advice!
    Don't copy somebody else's vimrc! Use it for inspiration, but add things one-at-a-time only as you need and understand them.
    Don't add plugins! Use the built-in tools like omnicomplete & spellcheck.
        Plugins are powerful, but don't get carried away! For example, I mostly use only 2 plugins (vim-tbone & vim-foldsearch).

Concepts to learn, or sometimes just be aware of!
    buffers: how to edit (:e), write (:w), list (:ls) , switch (:e 0), delete (:bd), and quit (:q).
    macros: how to record a macro to a register (qw stores a macro to the 'w' register). How to use a macro in insert mode (@w) or in command mode (normal @w).
    insert mode escapes: how to insert a register when in insert mode (ctrl-r), how to insert a character literally (ctrl-v).
    helpful commands: ":set syntax=html" to use html syntax. ":help" to use help pages. ":set spell" to turn on spellcheck, ":set nospell" to turn it off.
    vimdiff for side by side diffing and editing!
    folds to hide or show lines!

This talk was given for SLO County Coders, at StoryLabs San Luis Obispo, on Feb 20th 2023.
